Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today is part
three of our three-part mini-series on
unusual characters from World War I.
In case you missed them, part one
was on Lawrence of Arabia, the
British archaeologist and military
officer who fought alongside nomadic
tribes in the Arabian desert.
Part two was on Mata Hari, the Dutch
exotic dancer and courtesan who was
tried and shot on charges of being a spy.
And in today’s episode, part
three, we are going to talk about
Manfred von Richthofen, the man
better known as The Red Baron.
He is perhaps the best-known fighter
pilot in the world, with 80 confirmed
planes shot down, and his story is
one of chivalry, strategy, bravery,
propaganda, and the bloody reality
behind the supposed glories of war.
It’s also an interesting story from
the point of view of understanding
the evolving military role of the
aeroplane, so let’s not waste a
minute, and get right into it.
When war broke out in Europe on
the 28th of July 1914, Manfred
von Richthofen was 22 years old.
He had already spent a couple of
years training as a cavalry officer,
a soldier who sits on top of a
horse and charges at the enemy.
For this young man, joining the cavalry
was something of an inevitability.
He came from an aristocratic
Prussian family.
His father was in the
cavalry, as was his uncle.
Generations of von Richthofens had
served the Prussian king as cavalry
officers, so naturally, Manfred and his
brothers followed in their footsteps.
The problem was that it soon
became clear that cavalry was not
very useful in modern warfare.
Up against machine guns, and charging
through muddy fields, men riding on horses
are about as useful as a chocolate teapot.
Soon enough, both on the Allied and
the German side, cavalry regiments
were disbanded or reassigned, the men
who would previously charge valiantly
towards the enemy on horseback now
relegated to less glorious positions.
In the case of Manfred von
Richthofen, he was sent to work far
behind the front line, working on
communications and supply operations.
For a young man eager to serve his
country, and who felt like this chance had
been snatched from him, he was desperate
to find a way to get closer to the action.
The answer seemed to be
in the skies above him.
He had seen aeroplanes taking
off from far behind the front
line, sent on reconnaissance
missions to observe the enemy.
This was what he wanted
to be doing, he thought.
It was a chance to do something more
useful, and he wrote a letter to his
superior officer requesting a transfer.
It said, so the legend goes, "I have not
gone to war in order to collect cheese
and eggs, but for another purpose."
The request was granted, and in
May of 1915, he was transferred
to the German air service.
Now, the Wright Brothers had invented
the first aeroplane in 1903, and both
the German and the Allied armies used
aeroplanes, primarily for reconnaissance,
to fly up in the sky and observe the
positions and movements of the enemy.
To state the obvious, planes are
a very effective way of doing
this, and at least for the first
couple of years of the war, these
reconnaissance missions were fairly safe.
If the planes flew high enough,
they would be out of range
of gunfire from the ground.
And they didn’t need to worry too
much about enemy planes because
they weren’t much of a threat.
These planes were relatively basic;
just one pilot in the front and
another man in the back who was
responsible for taking photographs.
The pilot and his wingman would normally
carry a weapon, a pistol or a rifle.
They might shoot at an enemy aircraft
if they got too close, and some
planes had guns mounted to the side.
But it was rare for a plane to be
shot down by another plane because
it was so difficult to do so.
These planes had open cockpits, they would
be flying at 150 kilometres per hour,
often in difficult weather conditions.
In the early days of the war, the
air was a relatively safe place,
and there were even reports of
enemy pilots waving at each other
in the air, a show of solidarity.
This was the state of the war
of the air when von Richthofen
joined the air service.
And when he joined, he was not the one
piloting the plane, he was not the driver.
He came from an aristocratic family,
he was used to having chauffeurs who
would drive him around, so it seemed
natural that the piloting of the
aircraft would be done by someone of a
suitable, lower social class, and the
supposedly more skillful navigation
work would be done by von Richthofen.
After a few weeks of training, he
was ready for his first flight.
For several months, he worked
on reconnaissance, and he even
saw some action, shooting down a
French plane with his machine gun.
Now, he wasn’t credited with this kill,
or “victory” as it’s technically called.
This was because the French plane came
down behind French lines, and therefore
couldn’t be confirmed, but it seems that
this was the first time von Richthofen
successfully downed an enemy fighter.
It was also an important
realisation for him.
He was the reconnaissance
officer, sitting behind the pilot.
To successfully shoot down an enemy plane,
he would have to practically pull up
alongside it and, therefore, put himself
in grave danger, or at least, give himself
no positional advantage over his target.
Plus, having one person pulling the
trigger and another piloting the
aeroplane was kind of inefficient.
Split-second decisions needed
to be made, and it would be far
more efficient if the pilot was
also the one pulling the trigger.
And if there was a way for the machine
gun to be pointing forward, not out
from the side, this would give the
attacking aeroplane a great advantage.
You could point your aeroplane at your
target and fire rather than point your
aeroplane in one direction but have
your gun pointing in a different one.
Now, on both the German and the
Allied side, this was a problem
that engineers were rushing to fix.
The problem was that the propellers of
the aircraft were at the front of the
plane, and if you put a machine gun
behind the propeller, well the bullets
would hit the propeller and you’d damage
your own aircraft, perhaps irreparably.
There needed to be some way of
synchronising the spinning of the
propeller with the firing of the gun.
But this was very complicated.
Propellers spin very fast and at
irregular speeds, and machine guns
were not yet precise enough to
fire at exactly the right moment.
Fortunately, for the Germans at least, by
mid-1915, such a technique was invented.
A Dutch engineer called Anthony Fokker,
who was working for the Germans,
refined an existing French system that
allowed a pilot to fire a machine gun
forward without hitting the propeller.
It was such an important discovery
that German pilots were told not to fly
over enemy territory, lest they were
shot down and the secret discovered.
But the Allies were almost there too, and
by early 1916, British and French planes
were also capable of firing forwards.
Now, while this was all happening, von
Richthofen had a chance meeting that
would change the course of his life.
On a railway carriage, he noticed an
otherwise unremarkable young man, but
recognised him as Oswald Boelcke, an
aircraft officer whose legendary stories
of shooting down French and British planes
had been published in German newspapers.
Von Richthofen engaged him in
conversation, which only strengthened
his resolve to move from the
back seat to the pilot seat.
In October of 1915, he
started training as a pilot.
And despite the legendary career that
he would go on to have, by all accounts,
he was not a naturally talented pilot.
To some pilots, holding the
joystick, manoeuvring the plane,
this came almost naturally, and they
soon felt at one with the plane.
Not von Richthofen.
He even crashed his plane the first
time he was given full control.
Fortunately, he was a quick learner.
He shot down his first enemy plane in
April the following year, but again
this was an “unofficial” victory.
Like the one he did from the back seat
in 1915, the plane came down in French
territory, so it couldn’t be confirmed.
For a victory to be confirmed, there
had to be real, physical evidence,
not just the word of the pilot.
This will be important when it comes to
some of von Richthofen’s actions later on.
He met Oswald Boelcke again later in
1916, and by this time, Boelcke had become
something of a German propaganda icon.
He had 18 confirmed victories
under his belt, he had become the
youngest captain in German military
history, and was the most successful
aircraft officer in the German army.
He was all over the newspapers and
received a constant influx of fan mail.
He had outlined and written up guidelines
and rules for successful aircraft combat
operations, essentially writing the
playbook for how to win in the air.
And he had been tasked with setting
up a new, elite, flying squadron.
Von Richthofen was chosen to be one
of this elite group of 8 ace pilots.
An “ace”, by the way, is the
term given to a pilot once they
shoot down five enemy aeroplanes.
And this squadron proved to be deadly.
In its first month in the skies, Boelcke
alone shot down 10 British planes.
Von Richthofen got his first confirmed
victory on the 17th of September 1916.
And this was just the start.
The squadron would go on to be one of
the most successful German aircraft
squadrons in history, with 336 victories
and only 44 casualties, of whom 31
were killed, nine were wounded, two
were taken as prisoners of war, and
another two were killed in accidents.
One of those killed in accidents
was the ace leader of the squadron,
Oswald Boelcke, who died in
an accidental collision with
another plane from his squadron.
At the time of his death, in
October of 1916, he had 40 confirmed
victories, to von Richthofen’s four.
Boelcke was only a year older
than von Richthofen, but he was
something of a hero and mentor.
He had literally written the guidebook
on how to be a fighter pilot, and
was by far and away the most deadly
officer in the German airforce.
It seemed like von Richtofen was
determined to live up to his memory.
And his kills, or “victories”,
started to creep up.
In January of 1917, he announced his
16th confirmed kill, for which he was
awarded the prestigious Pour le Mérite
medal, otherwise known as the “Blue Max”.
As a result, von Richthofen was
given command of his own squadron.
He was fast becoming a deadly
fighter pilot, but he had also become
known for his chivalry and honour.
He would have a silver cup made every
time he had a confirmed kill, and he would
honour his fallen enemy by writing their
name and the details of their aircraft.
If he shot and damaged an aeroplane,
and it was heading towards
the ground, he wouldn’t follow
it and try to kill the pilot.
He knew they would be taken prisoner
by the German forces on the ground.
And when that happened, he was even
known for going and shaking his enemy’s
hand, and offering to dine with them
that evening before they would be
sent off to a prisoner of war camp.
As he put it, he was a
sportsman, not a butcher.
And if you are wondering quite how
he was so successful, historians seem
to suggest that it was principally a
question of strategy and technique.
He wasn’t some kind of thrill-seeking
and risky “Maverick” type figure in Top
Gun. He didn’t engage in spectacular
acrobatics or anything like that.
He was very calm under pressure;
he followed the guidebook as
set out by Oswald Boelcke.
He positioned his plane, making
it difficult for the enemy to see
him, he only fired when he was
sure he would hit the target, and
he retreated when it made sense.
He did everything right.
He was also a very good squadron
leader, and knew how to motivate and
instruct his men to work together
when it made sense, and to split
up when the conditions demanded it.
By April of 1917, he surpassed
his mentor’s total of 40 victories
and became the most successful
pilot in German military history.
By this time, he had also taken the
decision to paint his plane red, which
had earned him the nickname of Der Rote
Kampfflieger, or "the Red Fighter Pilot".
Or, as he is now better
known, “The Red Baron”.
It’s not completely clear why he
did this, but it’s been suggested by
historians that it might have been
similar to the way a medieval knight wore
a particular kind of armour, as a way
of singling him out on the battlefield.
By this time, he was extremely
confident of his own abilities, his
name and his reputation were known
to every Allied pilot, so perhaps
this decision was a way of striking
fear into the hearts of his enemies.
If they saw a red plane coming
up behind them, well, they
knew what they were up against.
And it wasn’t just The Red
Baron who painted his plane.
Several other members of his squadron
did so too, and they earned the
nickname “The Flying Circus” after
their colourfully-painted planes and
the fact that they would regularly be
sent from place to place, as required.
Von Richthofen was the leader of
this legendary squadron, and was
always up there in the skies,
fighting alongside his men.
But he was not invincible.
In July of 1917, he was shot in the head
during a fight with a British plane.
He became dizzy and couldn’t see properly,
and he lost control of his plane.
It hurtled towards the ground,
but fortunately, he regained his
composure and managed to crash-land.
Luckily, he was behind German lines.
He was taken to hospital to recover, and
after multiple operations, he declared
that he was ready to return to action.
The doctors said he was not.
The injury had most likely
caused lasting damage, but von
Richthofen was having none of it.
He returned to active service
less than three weeks after the
injury, but something had changed.
He had nausea and headaches
and just didn’t feel the same.
He took leave to recover and took
this opportunity to write his
biography, which he called Der rote
Kampfflieger, or "The Red Fighter Pilot".
Now, he seems to have been
instructed to write this by his
superiors as a propaganda tool.
This was in September of 1917;
the United States had joined the
war earlier that year, and things
were not going Germany’s way.
Von Richthofen was Germany’s most famous
fighter pilot, so what better way to
boost morale than for the public to read
about his heroic battles in the air?
German high command even made efforts
to stop him from going back into combat,
fearing that if he was killed, this
would be a great blow to national morale.
Although von Richthofen had by this
point spent two years in the air, and
seen friends and colleagues die on
an almost daily basis, he refused.
It was his duty, he said;
he would get back into the
cockpit and take to the skies.
And so he did, and his kill
count continued to rise.
60, 70, and on the 20th of April
1918, he recorded his 79th and
80th confirmed kills, more than
doubling his mentor’s tally.
Then, on the 21st of
April, his luck ran out.
He was flying with his
squadron in Northern France.
New to the squadron was Wolfram
von Richthofen, his cousin.
Wolfram was three years younger,
and was an inexperienced fighter.
Manfred, the squadron leader, had
instructed his cousin to pull back
if they encountered any enemy planes,
and observe the action from above.
Sure enough, the squadron
came across a group of British
fighter planes and engaged them.
As he’d been told, Wolfram pulled
his plane up and started to circle,
observing the fight from up high.
It just so happened that a young and
inexperienced Canadian pilot, fighting
on the Allied side, had been told exactly
the same thing by his squadron leader.
This Canadian, a man named Wilfrid
May, saw the German plane in the
air and decided to engage it.
When Manfred looked up and saw his
cousin in danger, he pulled his
plane up and raced to the rescue.
He managed to chase the Canadian
plane away, but for some unknown
reason, The Red Baron kept going.
He followed May deep into Allied territory
and came dangerously close to the ground.
This was one of the things his mentor,
Oswald Boelcke, had specifically detailed
that a fighter pilot should not do.
You should keep your composure, never
put yourself in unjustified danger, and
always have a clear path to return home.
Von Richthofen, the most successful
fighter pilot in the German military,
was breaking all the rules he lived by.
As von Richthofen continued in pursuit,
his plane suddenly stalled and tumbled to
the ground, deep into Allied territory.
The Allied forces rushed to the
wreckage, and there they found
a dead Manfred von Richthofen.
He had been killed by a single
bullet wound to the chest.
To this day, it’s not clear
exactly who killed him.
It was first believed that this came
from an enemy fighter plane, but it’s
now believed to have come from ground
fire, either an anti-aircraft gun
or a machine gun pointed to the sky.
Whoever was ultimately responsible,
the Red Baron was dead.
He was the most deadly fighter in
the German airforce, responsible
for dozens of Allied deaths, but
in death, he was treated with
respect and dignity by his enemies.
He was given a full military funeral,
with the men he had been chasing down
just hours before carrying his coffin.
Ever since, historians have been
puzzling over the details of his death.
His decision to chase this enemy plane
low over enemy territory went against
everything he had been taught, and that he
had drilled into the men in his squadron.
Was it because he simply didn’t
know that this was enemy territory?
This was a period of flux during the war,
and a combination of high winds and moving
territorial boundaries might have meant
he had gone much further than he thought
and crossed into territory he thought was
still under German control, but was not.
Or was he simply not thinking straight?
Had the head injury from the previous year
impacted his judgment to such an extent
that the composure and rationality that
had kept him alive for so long was gone?
We will never know, but his
name is inscribed in legend.
Loved by his colleagues, feared
and respected by his enemies.
His victory record has now been
surpassed, but history will
only remember one Red Baron.
OK then, that is it for today's
episode on Manfred von Richtofen.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
and that you’ve learned a little bit
more about the man behind the title.
As a quick reminder, in case you haven’t
listened to them already, this was part
three of our three-part mini-series on
unusual characters from World War I.
Part one was on Lawrence of Arabia,
and part two was on Mata Hari.
You can, of course, listen to them
independently, but I hope that
they make for a nice little trio.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.